Memory itself is still something of a mystery, but it basically consists of physical changes in the brain that encode a representation of past experiences. Those memory traces — known as engrams — can be accessed to reconstruct the past, albeit imperfectly. Many experts believe that engrams are built by strengthening synapses— the sites where signals are transmitted between nerve cells, or neurons. Recalling a memory reactivates a pattern of nerve cell signaling that mimics the original experience.

Forgetting’s great value implies that it doesn’t happen accidentally. A growing number of researchers believe that the brain’s remarkable storage ability suggests that it possesses an efficient information management system, equipped with data disposal methods. Some forgetting does appear to be “passive” — a result of either natural decay of the biological material forming engrams or the loss of ability to retrieve them. But many forms of forgetting are more like running a program that wipes data off your hard drive. New stimuli can actively interfere with old memories, for instance. Recalling parts of a memory can induce loss of other parts of it. And “forgetting cells” might actually signal the brain to sweep memory traces away. Forgetting could be the brain’s main strategy in managing information.

Encoding is the first step in creating a memory. It's a biological phenomenon, rooted in the senses, that begins with perception. Your visual system registers features, your auditory system picks up sounds, and other senses notice smells or touch. The hippocampus, along with the frontal cortex, is responsible for analyzing these various sensory inputs and deciding if they're worth remembering. If they are, they may become part of your long-term memory.

A memory begins with perception, but it is encoded and stored using the language of electricity and chemicals. Nerve cells connect at a synapse, where electrical pulses carrying messages leap across gaps, triggering the release of neurotransmitters. Each brain cell can form thousands of links, and as one brain cell sends signals to another, the synapse between the two gets stronger. With each new experience, your brain slightly rewires its physical structure. This flexibility is called plasticity.

Once a memory is created, it must be stored. Many experts think there are three ways we store memories: first in the sensory stage; then in short-term memory; and ultimately, for some memories, in long-term memory. The creation of a memory begins with its perception in the brief sensory stage. After that first flicker, the sensation is stored in short-term memory, which has a fairly limited capacity; it can hold about seven items for no more than 20 or 30 seconds at a time. Important information is gradually transferred from short-term memory into long-term memory. The more the information is repeated or used, the more likely it is to eventually end up in long-term memory. Long-term memory can store unlimited amounts of information indefinitely.

When you want to remember something, you retrieve the information on an unconscious level, bringing it into your conscious mind at will. If you’ve forgotten something, it may be because you didn't encode it very effectively, because you were distracted, or because you're having trouble retrieving it. A failure to remember can happen at any of the three stages: encoding, storage, or retrieval.
