We seem as a species to be driven by a desire to make meanings: above all, we are surely Homo significans - meaning-makers. Distinctively, we make meanings through our creation and interpretation of 'signs'. Signs take the form of words, images, sounds, odours, flavours, acts or objects, but such things have no intrinsic meaning and become signs only when we invest them with meaning. 'Nothing is a sign unless it is interpreted as a sign'. Anything can be a sign as long as someone interprets it as 'signifying' something - referring to or standing for something other than itself. We interpret things as signs largely unconsciously by relating them to familiar systems of conventions. It is this meaningful use of signs which is at the heart of the concerns of semiotics.

The two dominant models of what constitutes a sign are those of the linguist Ferdinand de Saussure and the philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce. Saussure offered a 'dyadic' or two-part model of the sign. He defined a sign as being composed of a 'signifier' (the form which the sign takes) and the 'signified' (the concept it represents). The sign is the whole that results from the association of the signifier with the signified.

A formal system has the following components, as a minimum: A formal language, which is a set of well-formed formulas, which are strings of symbols from an alphabet, formed by a formal grammar. It also has a deductive system, or proof system, which has rules of inference that take axioms and infers theorems, both of which are part of the formal language. A formal system is said to be recursive (i.e. effective) or recursively enumerable if the set of axioms and the set of inference rules are decidable sets or semidecidable sets, respectively.

Gödel, Escher, Bach explores common themes in the lives and works of logician Kurt Gödel, artist M. C. Escher, and composer Johann Sebastian Bach, to expound concepts fundamental to mathematics, symmetry, and intelligence. The book contains many instances of recursion and self-reference, where objects and ideas speak about or refer back to themselves. To describe such self-referencing objects, Hofstadter coins the term "strange loop". To escape many of the logical contradictions brought about by these self-referencing objects, Hofstadter discusses Zen koans. He attempts to show readers how to perceive reality outside their own experience and embrace such paradoxical questions by rejecting the premise.
