The symmetry of time (T-symmetry) can be understood simply as the following: if time were perfectly symmetrical, a video of real events would seem realistic whether played forwards or backwards. Most fundamental laws of physics are time-reversible. However, the macroscopic world is not. A ball bouncing and eventually coming to a stop is not time-reversible. While going forward, kinetic energy is dissipated and entropy is increased. According to the statistical notion of increasing entropy, the "arrow" of time is identified with a decrease of free energy.

Entropy is one of the few quantities in the physical sciences that requires a particular direction for time. As one goes "forward" in time, the second law of thermodynamics says, the entropy of an isolated system can increase, but not decrease. The existence of a thermodynamic arrow of time implies that the system is highly ordered in one time direction only, which would by definition be the "past". This is often linked to the cosmological arrow of time, because it is ultimately about the boundary conditions of the early universe. According to the Big Bang theory, the Universe was initially very hot with energy distributed uniformly, a state of low entropy for a system where gravity is important.

More recently, physicists are unmasking a more fundamental source for the arrow of time: quantum entanglement. The idea is that energy disperses and objects equilibrate because elementary particles become intertwined when they interact. Deep down, nature is inherently uncertain. A particle lacks definite physical properties and is defined only by probabilities of being in various states. This quantum uncertainty gives rise to entanglement, the putative source of the arrow of time.

Parallel to these ideas, physics is in a crisis. General relativity and quantum mechanics, our two most successful theories, are thought to conflict with one another. Physicists want to produce a theory of “quantum gravity” that replaces both. In some of these new approaches, such as loop quantum gravity, time appears to be eliminated entirely as a fundamental aspect of reality. This suggests that time might not exist at a fundamental level, but instead “emerges” from an underlying, timeless physics, much like a table emerges from a collection of particles. However, how time might emerge from something more fundamental is still an open question.
